reference/faith.md, before:

# Faith's Phylogenetic Diversity (PD)

Calculates the sum of the branch lengths for all species present in a
sample.

## Usage

``` r
faith(counts, tree = NULL, margin = 1L, cpus = n_cpus())
```

## Arguments

- counts:

  A numeric matrix of count data (samples \\\times\\ features). Also
  supports `phyloseq`, `rbiom`, `SummarizedExperiment`, and
  `TreeSummarizedExperiment` objects. See
  [`vignette('performance')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/performance.md)
  for optimizing large datasets.

- tree:

  A `phylo`-class object representing the phylogenetic tree for the OTUs
  in `counts`. The OTU identifiers given by `colnames(counts)` must be
  present in `tree`. Can be omitted if a tree is embedded with the
  `counts` object or as `attr(counts, 'tree')`.

- margin:

  The margin containing samples. `1` if samples are rows, `2` if samples
  are columns. Ignored when `counts` is a special object class (e.g.
  `phyloseq`). Default: `1`

- cpus:

  How many parallel processing threads should be used. The default,
  [`n_cpus()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/n_cpus.md), will
  use all logical CPU cores.

## Details

Faith's PD is defined as: \$\$\sum\_{i = 1}^{n} L_i A_i\$\$

Where:

- \\n\\ : The number of branches in the phylogenetic tree.

- \\L_i\\ : The length of the \\i\\-th branch.

- \\A_i\\ : A binary value (1 if any descendants of branch \\i\\ are
  present in the sample, 0 otherwise).

## References

Faith, D. P. (1992). Conservation evaluation and phylogenetic diversity.
*Biological Conservation*, 61(1), 1-10.
[doi:10.1016/0006-3207(92)91201-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-3207%2892%2991201-3)

## See also

[`alpha_div()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/alpha_div.md),
[`vignette('adiv')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/adiv.md)

Other Phylogenetic metrics:
[`generalized_unifrac()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/generalized_unifrac.md),
[`normalized_unifrac()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/normalized_unifrac.md),
[`unweighted_unifrac()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/unweighted_unifrac.md),
[`variance_adjusted_unifrac()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/variance_adjusted_unifrac.md),
[`weighted_unifrac()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/weighted_unifrac.md)

## Examples

``` r
    faith(ex_counts, tree = ex_tree)
#> Saliva   Gums   Nose  Stool 
#>    180    191    215    202 
```

Commit message:

Deploying to gh-pages from @ cmmr/ecodive@857aa24f1ada28a10838b64d5c1b85e3a83d7d46 🚀

reference/faith.md, after:

# Faith's Phylogenetic Diversity (PD)

Calculates the sum of the branch lengths for all species present in a
sample.

## Usage

``` r
faith(counts, tree = NULL, margin = 1L, cpus = n_cpus())
```

## Arguments

- counts:

  A numeric matrix of count data (samples \\\times\\ features).
  Typically contains absolute abundances (integer counts), though
  proportions are also accepted.

- tree:

  A `phylo`-class object representing the phylogenetic tree for the OTUs
  in `counts`. The OTU identifiers given by `colnames(counts)` must be
  present in `tree`. Can be omitted if a tree is embedded with the
  `counts` object or as `attr(counts, 'tree')`.

- margin:

  The margin containing samples. `1` if samples are rows, `2` if samples
  are columns. Ignored when `counts` is a special object class (e.g.
  `phyloseq`). Default: `1`

- cpus:

  How many parallel processing threads should be used. The default,
  [`n_cpus()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/n_cpus.md), will
  use all logical CPU cores.

## Details

Faith's PD is defined as: \$\$\sum\_{i = 1}^{n} L_i A_i\$\$

Where:

- \\n\\ : The number of branches in the phylogenetic tree.

- \\L_i\\ : The length of the \\i\\-th branch.

- \\A_i\\ : A binary value (1 if any descendants of branch \\i\\ are
  present in the sample, 0 otherwise).

## Input Types

The `counts` parameter is designed to accept a simple numeric matrix,
but seamlessly supports objects from the following biological data
packages:

- `phyloseq`

- `rbiom`

- `SummarizedExperiment`

- `TreeSummarizedExperiment`

For large datasets, standard matrix operations may be slow. See
[`vignette('performance')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/performance.md)
for details on using optimized formats (e.g. sparse matrices) and
parallel processing.

## References

Faith, D. P. (1992). Conservation evaluation and phylogenetic diversity.
*Biological Conservation*, 61(1), 1-10.
[doi:10.1016/0006-3207(92)91201-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-3207%2892%2991201-3)

## See also

[`alpha_div()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/alpha_div.md),
[`vignette('adiv')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/adiv.md)

Other Phylogenetic metrics:
[`generalized_unifrac()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/generalized_unifrac.md),
[`normalized_unifrac()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/normalized_unifrac.md),
[`unweighted_unifrac()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/unweighted_unifrac.md),
[`variance_adjusted_unifrac()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/variance_adjusted_unifrac.md),
[`weighted_unifrac()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/weighted_unifrac.md)

## Examples

``` r
    faith(ex_counts, tree = ex_tree)
#> Saliva   Gums   Nose  Stool 
#>    180    191    215    202 
```
