reference/fisher.md, before:

# Fisher's Alpha

A parametric diversity index assuming species abundances follow a
log-series distribution.

## Usage

``` r
fisher(counts, digits = 3L, margin = 1L, cpus = n_cpus())
```

## Arguments

- counts:

  A numeric matrix of count data (samples \\\times\\ features). Also
  supports `phyloseq`, `rbiom`, `SummarizedExperiment`, and
  `TreeSummarizedExperiment` objects. See
  [`vignette('performance')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/performance.md)
  for optimizing large datasets.

- digits:

  Precision of the returned values, in number of decimal places. E.g.
  the default `digits=3` could return `6.392`.

- margin:

  The margin containing samples. `1` if samples are rows, `2` if samples
  are columns. Ignored when `counts` is a special object class (e.g.
  `phyloseq`). Default: `1`

- cpus:

  How many parallel processing threads should be used. The default,
  [`n_cpus()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/n_cpus.md), will
  use all logical CPU cores.

## Details

Fisher's Alpha (\\\alpha\\) is the parameter in the equation:
\$\$\frac{n}{\alpha} = \ln{\left(1 + \frac{X_T}{\alpha}\right)}\$\$

Where:

- \\n\\ : The number of features.

- \\X_T\\ : Total of all counts (sequencing depth).

The value of \\\alpha\\ is solved for iteratively.

**Parameter: digits**

The precision (number of decimal places) to use when solving the
equation.

## References

Fisher, R. A., Corbet, A. S., & Williams, C. B. (1943). The relation
between the number of species and the number of individuals in a random
sample of an animal population. *Journal of Animal Ecology*, 12, 42-58.
[doi:10.2307/1411](https://doi.org/10.2307/1411)

## See also

[`alpha_div()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/alpha_div.md),
[`vignette('adiv')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/adiv.md)

Other Diversity metrics:
[`brillouin()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/brillouin.md),
[`inv_simpson()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/inv_simpson.md),
[`shannon()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/shannon.md),
[`simpson()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/simpson.md)

## Examples

``` r
    fisher(ex_counts)
#> Saliva   Gums   Nose  Stool 
#>  0.635  0.700  0.847  0.744 
```

Commit message:

Deploying to gh-pages from @ cmmr/ecodive@857aa24f1ada28a10838b64d5c1b85e3a83d7d46 🚀

reference/fisher.md, after:

# Fisher's Alpha

A parametric diversity index assuming species abundances follow a
log-series distribution.

## Usage

``` r
fisher(counts, digits = 3L, margin = 1L, cpus = n_cpus())
```

## Arguments

- counts:

  A numeric matrix of count data (samples \\\times\\ features).
  Typically contains absolute abundances (integer counts), though
  proportions are also accepted.

- digits:

  Precision of the returned values, in number of decimal places. E.g.
  the default `digits=3` could return `6.392`.

- margin:

  The margin containing samples. `1` if samples are rows, `2` if samples
  are columns. Ignored when `counts` is a special object class (e.g.
  `phyloseq`). Default: `1`

- cpus:

  How many parallel processing threads should be used. The default,
  [`n_cpus()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/n_cpus.md), will
  use all logical CPU cores.

## Details

Fisher's Alpha (\\\alpha\\) is the parameter in the equation:
\$\$\frac{n}{\alpha} = \ln{\left(1 + \frac{X_T}{\alpha}\right)}\$\$

Where:

- \\n\\ : The number of features.

- \\X_T\\ : Total of all counts (sequencing depth).

The value of \\\alpha\\ is solved for iteratively.

**Parameter: digits**

The precision (number of decimal places) to use when solving the
equation.

## Input Types

The `counts` parameter is designed to accept a simple numeric matrix,
but seamlessly supports objects from the following biological data
packages:

- `phyloseq`

- `rbiom`

- `SummarizedExperiment`

- `TreeSummarizedExperiment`

For large datasets, standard matrix operations may be slow. See
[`vignette('performance')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/performance.md)
for details on using optimized formats (e.g. sparse matrices) and
parallel processing.

## References

Fisher, R. A., Corbet, A. S., & Williams, C. B. (1943). The relation
between the number of species and the number of individuals in a random
sample of an animal population. *Journal of Animal Ecology*, 12, 42-58.
[doi:10.2307/1411](https://doi.org/10.2307/1411)

## See also

[`alpha_div()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/alpha_div.md),
[`vignette('adiv')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/adiv.md)

Other Diversity metrics:
[`brillouin()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/brillouin.md),
[`inv_simpson()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/inv_simpson.md),
[`shannon()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/shannon.md),
[`simpson()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/simpson.md)

## Examples

``` r
    fisher(ex_counts)
#> Saliva   Gums   Nose  Stool 
#>  0.635  0.700  0.847  0.744 
```
