reference/hamming.md, before:

# Hamming distance

Measures the minimum number of substitutions required to change one
string into the other.

## Usage

``` r
hamming(counts, margin = 1L, pairs = NULL, cpus = n_cpus())
```

## Arguments

- counts:

  A numeric matrix of count data (samples \\\times\\ features). Also
  supports `phyloseq`, `rbiom`, `SummarizedExperiment`, and
  `TreeSummarizedExperiment` objects. See
  [`vignette('performance')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/performance.md)
  for optimizing large datasets.

- margin:

  The margin containing samples. `1` if samples are rows, `2` if samples
  are columns. Ignored when `counts` is a special object class (e.g.
  `phyloseq`). Default: `1`

- pairs:

  Which combinations of samples should distances be calculated for? The
  default value (`NULL`) calculates all-vs-all. Provide a numeric or
  logical vector specifying positions in the distance matrix to
  calculate. See examples.

- cpus:

  How many parallel processing threads should be used. The default,
  [`n_cpus()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/n_cpus.md), will
  use all logical CPU cores.

## Details

The Hamming distance is defined as: \$\$(A + B) - 2J\$\$

Where:

- \\A\\, \\B\\ : Number of features in each sample.

- \\J\\ : Number of features in common (intersection).

Base R Equivalent:

    sum(xor(x, y))

## References

Hamming, R. W. (1950). Error detecting and error correcting codes. *Bell
System Technical Journal*, 29(2), 147-160.
[doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1950.tb00463.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1950.tb00463.x)

## See also

[`beta_div()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/beta_div.md),
[`vignette('bdiv')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/bdiv.md),
[`vignette('bdiv_guide')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/bdiv_guide.md)

Other Presence/Absence metrics:
[`jaccard()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/jaccard.md),
[`ochiai()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/ochiai.md),
[`sorensen()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/sorensen.md)

## Examples

``` r
    hamming(ex_counts)
#>       Saliva Gums Nose
#> Gums       1          
#> Nose       2    1     
#> Stool      3    2    1
```

Commit message:

Deploying to gh-pages from @ cmmr/ecodive@857aa24f1ada28a10838b64d5c1b85e3a83d7d46 🚀

reference/hamming.md, after:

# Hamming distance

Measures the minimum number of substitutions required to change one
string into the other.

## Usage

``` r
hamming(counts, margin = 1L, pairs = NULL, cpus = n_cpus())
```

## Arguments

- counts:

  A numeric matrix of count data (samples \\\times\\ features).
  Typically contains absolute abundances (integer counts), though
  proportions are also accepted.

- margin:

  The margin containing samples. `1` if samples are rows, `2` if samples
  are columns. Ignored when `counts` is a special object class (e.g.
  `phyloseq`). Default: `1`

- pairs:

  Which combinations of samples should distances be calculated for? The
  default value (`NULL`) calculates all-vs-all. Provide a numeric or
  logical vector specifying positions in the distance matrix to
  calculate. See examples.

- cpus:

  How many parallel processing threads should be used. The default,
  [`n_cpus()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/n_cpus.md), will
  use all logical CPU cores.

## Details

The Hamming distance is defined as: \$\$(A + B) - 2J\$\$

Where:

- \\A\\, \\B\\ : Number of features in each sample.

- \\J\\ : Number of features in common (intersection).

Base R Equivalent:

    sum(xor(x, y))

## Input Types

The `counts` parameter is designed to accept a simple numeric matrix,
but seamlessly supports objects from the following biological data
packages:

- `phyloseq`

- `rbiom`

- `SummarizedExperiment`

- `TreeSummarizedExperiment`

For large datasets, standard matrix operations may be slow. See
[`vignette('performance')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/performance.md)
for details on using optimized formats (e.g. sparse matrices) and
parallel processing.

## References

Hamming, R. W. (1950). Error detecting and error correcting codes. *Bell
System Technical Journal*, 29(2), 147-160.
[doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1950.tb00463.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1950.tb00463.x)

## See also

[`beta_div()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/beta_div.md),
[`vignette('bdiv')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/bdiv.md),
[`vignette('bdiv_guide')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/bdiv_guide.md)

Other Presence/Absence metrics:
[`jaccard()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/jaccard.md),
[`ochiai()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/ochiai.md),
[`sorensen()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/sorensen.md)

## Examples

``` r
    hamming(ex_counts)
#>       Saliva Gums Nose
#> Gums       1          
#> Nose       2    1     
#> Stool      3    2    1
```
