reference/simpson.md, before:

# Gini-Simpson Index

The probability that two entities taken at random from the dataset
represent different types.

## Usage

``` r
simpson(counts, norm = "percent", margin = 1L, cpus = n_cpus())
```

## Arguments

- counts:

  A numeric matrix of count data (samples \\\times\\ features). Also
  supports `phyloseq`, `rbiom`, `SummarizedExperiment`, and
  `TreeSummarizedExperiment` objects. See
  [`vignette('performance')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/performance.md)
  for optimizing large datasets.

- norm:

  Normalize the incoming counts. Options are:

  - `'percent'`: Relative abundance (sample abundances sum to 1).

  - `'binary'`: Unweighted presence/absence (each count is either 0 or
    1).

  - `'clr'`: Centered log ratio.

  - `'none'`: No transformation.

  Default: `'percent'`, which is the expected input for these formulas.

- margin:

  The margin containing samples. `1` if samples are rows, `2` if samples
  are columns. Ignored when `counts` is a special object class (e.g.
  `phyloseq`). Default: `1`

- cpus:

  How many parallel processing threads should be used. The default,
  [`n_cpus()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/n_cpus.md), will
  use all logical CPU cores.

## Details

The Gini-Simpson index is defined as: \$\$1 - \sum\_{i = 1}^{n}
P_i^2\$\$

Where:

- \\P_i\\ : Proportional abundance of the \\i\\-th feature.

**Base R Equivalent:**

    p <- x / sum(x)
    1 - sum(p ** 2)

## References

Simpson, E. H. (1949). Measurement of diversity. *Nature*, 163, 688.
[doi:10.1038/163688a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/163688a0)

## See also

[`alpha_div()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/alpha_div.md),
[`vignette('adiv')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/adiv.md)

Other Diversity metrics:
[`brillouin()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/brillouin.md),
[`fisher()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/fisher.md),
[`inv_simpson()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/inv_simpson.md),
[`shannon()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/shannon.md)

## Examples

``` r
    simpson(ex_counts)
#>     Saliva       Gums       Nose      Stool 
#> 0.50725478 0.18924937 0.64075388 0.01295525 
```

Commit message:

Deploying to gh-pages from @ cmmr/ecodive@857aa24f1ada28a10838b64d5c1b85e3a83d7d46 🚀

reference/simpson.md, after:

# Gini-Simpson Index

The probability that two entities taken at random from the dataset
represent different types.

## Usage

``` r
simpson(counts, margin = 1L, cpus = n_cpus())
```

## Arguments

- counts:

  A numeric matrix of count data (samples \\\times\\ features).
  Typically contains absolute abundances (integer counts), though
  proportions are also accepted.

- margin:

  The margin containing samples. `1` if samples are rows, `2` if samples
  are columns. Ignored when `counts` is a special object class (e.g.
  `phyloseq`). Default: `1`

- cpus:

  How many parallel processing threads should be used. The default,
  [`n_cpus()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/n_cpus.md), will
  use all logical CPU cores.

## Details

The Gini-Simpson index is defined as: \$\$1 - \sum\_{i = 1}^{n}
P_i^2\$\$

Where:

- \\n\\ : The number of features.

- \\P_i\\ : Proportional abundance of the \\i\\-th feature.

**Base R Equivalent:**

    p <- x / sum(x)
    1 - sum(p ** 2)

## Input Types

The `counts` parameter is designed to accept a simple numeric matrix,
but seamlessly supports objects from the following biological data
packages:

- `phyloseq`

- `rbiom`

- `SummarizedExperiment`

- `TreeSummarizedExperiment`

For large datasets, standard matrix operations may be slow. See
[`vignette('performance')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/performance.md)
for details on using optimized formats (e.g. sparse matrices) and
parallel processing.

## References

Simpson, E. H. (1949). Measurement of diversity. *Nature*, 163, 688.
[doi:10.1038/163688a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/163688a0)

## See also

[`alpha_div()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/alpha_div.md),
[`vignette('adiv')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/adiv.md)

Other Diversity metrics:
[`brillouin()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/brillouin.md),
[`fisher()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/fisher.md),
[`inv_simpson()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/inv_simpson.md),
[`shannon()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/shannon.md)

## Examples

``` r
    simpson(ex_counts)
#>     Saliva       Gums       Nose      Stool 
#> 0.50725478 0.18924937 0.64075388 0.01295525 
```
