reference/squared_chord.md, before:

# Squared Chord distance

The squared version of the Chord distance.

## Usage

``` r
squared_chord(
  counts,
  norm = "percent",
  margin = 1L,
  pairs = NULL,
  cpus = n_cpus()
)
```

## Arguments

- counts:

  A numeric matrix of count data (samples \\\times\\ features). Also
  supports `phyloseq`, `rbiom`, `SummarizedExperiment`, and
  `TreeSummarizedExperiment` objects. See
  [`vignette('performance')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/performance.md)
  for optimizing large datasets.

- norm:

  Normalize the incoming counts. Options are:

  - `'percent'`: Relative abundance (sample abundances sum to 1).

  - `'binary'`: Unweighted presence/absence (each count is either 0 or
    1).

  - `'clr'`: Centered log ratio.

  - `'none'`: No transformation.

  Default: `'percent'`, which is the expected input for these formulas.

- margin:

  The margin containing samples. `1` if samples are rows, `2` if samples
  are columns. Ignored when `counts` is a special object class (e.g.
  `phyloseq`). Default: `1`

- pairs:

  Which combinations of samples should distances be calculated for? The
  default value (`NULL`) calculates all-vs-all. Provide a numeric or
  logical vector specifying positions in the distance matrix to
  calculate. See examples.

- cpus:

  How many parallel processing threads should be used. The default,
  [`n_cpus()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/n_cpus.md), will
  use all logical CPU cores.

## Details

The Squared Chord distance is defined as:
\$\$\sum\_{i=1}^{n}\left(\sqrt{P_i} - \sqrt{Q_i}\right)^2\$\$

Where:

- \\P_i\\, \\Q_i\\ : Proportional abundances of the \\i\\-th feature.

- \\n\\ : The number of features.

Base R Equivalent:

    sum((sqrt(x) - sqrt(y)) ^ 2)

## References

Legendre, P., & Legendre, L. (2012). Numerical ecology. Elsevier.

## See also

[`beta_div()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/beta_div.md),
[`vignette('bdiv')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/bdiv.md),
[`vignette('bdiv_guide')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/bdiv_guide.md)

Other Abundance metrics:
[`aitchison()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/aitchison.md),
[`bhattacharyya()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/bhattacharyya.md),
[`bray()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/bray.md),
[`canberra()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/canberra.md),
[`chebyshev()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/chebyshev.md),
[`chord()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/chord.md),
[`clark()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/clark.md),
[`divergence()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/divergence.md),
[`euclidean()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/euclidean.md),
[`gower()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/gower.md),
[`hellinger()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/hellinger.md),
[`horn()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/horn.md),
[`jensen()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/jensen.md),
[`jsd()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/jsd.md),
[`lorentzian()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/lorentzian.md),
[`manhattan()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/manhattan.md),
[`matusita()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/matusita.md),
[`minkowski()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/minkowski.md),
[`morisita()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/morisita.md),
[`motyka()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/motyka.md),
[`psym_chisq()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/psym_chisq.md),
[`soergel()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/soergel.md),
[`squared_chisq()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/squared_chisq.md),
[`squared_euclidean()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/squared_euclidean.md),
[`topsoe()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/topsoe.md),
[`wave_hedges()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/wave_hedges.md)

## Examples

``` r
    squared_chord(ex_counts)
#>          Saliva      Gums      Nose
#> Gums  0.2368872                    
#> Nose  1.6731536 1.6210892          
#> Stool 1.7347018 1.7617761 1.8002844
```

Commit message:

Deploying to gh-pages from @ cmmr/ecodive@857aa24f1ada28a10838b64d5c1b85e3a83d7d46 🚀

reference/squared_chord.md, after:

# Squared Chord distance

The squared version of the Chord distance.

## Usage

``` r
squared_chord(counts, margin = 1L, pairs = NULL, cpus = n_cpus())
```

## Arguments

- counts:

  A numeric matrix of count data (samples \\\times\\ features).
  Typically contains absolute abundances (integer counts), though
  proportions are also accepted.

- margin:

  The margin containing samples. `1` if samples are rows, `2` if samples
  are columns. Ignored when `counts` is a special object class (e.g.
  `phyloseq`). Default: `1`

- pairs:

  Which combinations of samples should distances be calculated for? The
  default value (`NULL`) calculates all-vs-all. Provide a numeric or
  logical vector specifying positions in the distance matrix to
  calculate. See examples.

- cpus:

  How many parallel processing threads should be used. The default,
  [`n_cpus()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/n_cpus.md), will
  use all logical CPU cores.

## Details

The Squared Chord distance is defined as:
\$\$\sum\_{i=1}^{n}\left(\sqrt{P_i} - \sqrt{Q_i}\right)^2\$\$

Where:

- \\P_i\\, \\Q_i\\ : Proportional abundances of the \\i\\-th feature.

- \\n\\ : The number of features.

Base R Equivalent:

    p <- x / sum(x)
    q <- y / sum(y)
    sum((sqrt(x) - sqrt(y)) ^ 2)

## Input Types

The `counts` parameter is designed to accept a simple numeric matrix,
but seamlessly supports objects from the following biological data
packages:

- `phyloseq`

- `rbiom`

- `SummarizedExperiment`

- `TreeSummarizedExperiment`

For large datasets, standard matrix operations may be slow. See
[`vignette('performance')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/performance.md)
for details on using optimized formats (e.g. sparse matrices) and
parallel processing.

## References

Legendre, P., & Legendre, L. (2012). Numerical ecology. Elsevier.

## See also

[`beta_div()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/beta_div.md),
[`vignette('bdiv')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/bdiv.md),
[`vignette('bdiv_guide')`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/articles/bdiv_guide.md)

Other Abundance metrics:
[`aitchison()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/aitchison.md),
[`bhattacharyya()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/bhattacharyya.md),
[`bray()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/bray.md),
[`canberra()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/canberra.md),
[`chebyshev()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/chebyshev.md),
[`chord()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/chord.md),
[`clark()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/clark.md),
[`divergence()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/divergence.md),
[`euclidean()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/euclidean.md),
[`gower()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/gower.md),
[`hellinger()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/hellinger.md),
[`horn()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/horn.md),
[`jensen()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/jensen.md),
[`jsd()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/jsd.md),
[`lorentzian()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/lorentzian.md),
[`manhattan()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/manhattan.md),
[`matusita()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/matusita.md),
[`minkowski()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/minkowski.md),
[`morisita()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/morisita.md),
[`motyka()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/motyka.md),
[`psym_chisq()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/psym_chisq.md),
[`soergel()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/soergel.md),
[`squared_chisq()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/squared_chisq.md),
[`squared_euclidean()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/squared_euclidean.md),
[`topsoe()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/topsoe.md),
[`wave_hedges()`](https://cmmr.github.io/ecodive/reference/wave_hedges.md)

## Examples

``` r
    squared_chord(ex_counts)
#>          Saliva      Gums      Nose
#> Gums  0.2368872                    
#> Nose  1.6731536 1.6210892          
#> Stool 1.7347018 1.7617761 1.8002844
```
